# Functions

## Lesson objectives

_After this lesson students will be able to:_

1. Describe why we use functions
1. Declare a function
1. Invoke a function
1. Properly name a function
1. Write an arrow function with a parameter
1. Write an arrow function with multiple parameters
1. Write an arrow function with a return statement
1. Break a problem down into steps

## Setup

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/576d34f9-111f-430d-b5a9-39b7e17a8730

In `student_examples` for today, make a file `functions.js`

Test that a console.log will appear in Terminal when you run the file.

```
$ node functions.js
```

## Describe why we use functions

Using functions is another application of DRY. Don't Repeat Yourself. With a function, you can store code that can be used conveniently as many times as you wish, without having to rewrite the code each time.

In the following example, without a function, we'd have to write the same 3 lines of code every single time we would want to print a banner. However, when we put it in a function we can do it in one short line over and over again!

## Defining a function

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/99209e07-c117-4033-b66e-749763f7ce9f

```javascript
const printBanner = () => {
  console.log('========================')
  console.log('Insert Banner Text Here')
  console.log('========================')
}
```

Always use **`const`** to declare your functions. It would be a strange day when a function would need to be reassigned.

The code will not run yet. The function needs to be **invoked**.

## Invoke a function

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/469b5f15-c933-4935-8f98-8a6470bd8fbe

Use one line of code to run multiple lines of code

```javascript
printBanner()
```

Simply use the name of the variable and use **parentheses** to invoke the function.

If the parentheses are not included, the function will not run.

The invocation comes **after** the function definition. If you write it beforehand, it will be trying to invoke something that doesn't yet exist according to the interpreter.

This will work:

```javascript
const printBanner = () => {
  console.log('========================')
  console.log('Insert Banner Text Here')
  console.log('========================')
}

printBanner()
```

VS

This will not:

```javascript
printBanner()

const printBanner = () => {
  console.log('========================')
  console.log('Insert Banner Text Here')
  console.log('========================')
}
```

### Exercise

- Write a function `printSum` that will console.log the result of 10 + 10

**Extra Reps**

- Write a function `printTriangle` that will print these pound signs to the console (there are 5 console.logs inside the function):

```
#
##
###
####
#####
```

- Make it so that `printTriangle` will print the pound signs using a for loop (there is a for loop and only 1 console.log inside the function).

- Make it so that when you can invoke the function with the number of pound signs to print (not just hardcoded to print 5)

## Properly name a function

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/b51f4637-3f97-4bbe-92aa-6e62a5d4795f

The variable you use for a function should contain a **verb**. Functions **do** something, most often:

- getting data
- setting data
- checking data
- printing data

If the purpose of your function is to check data, for example, use the verb `check` in the variable name.

Example function that contains a conditional:

```javascript
const checkInputLength = input => {
  if (input.length > 10) {
    console.log('input length is greater than 10. Please shorten!')
  } else {
    console.log('input length is not greater than 10. Good to go!')
  }
}
```

Functions should try to do **only one thing**

If a function, called `checkInputLength`, does more than just check input, then it is a poor function.

Takeaway: Think about appropriate **verbs** to use in your function variable names. The verbs should indicate the **one thing** that the function does.

## Write an arrow function with a parameter

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/ab12dd2f-47c7-4035-bd20-6779a3d81664

The preceding function, `checkInputLength` had a **parameter** called `input`.

Functions can receive input that modify their behavior a bit. This input is called a **parameter**.

In the below example, the parameter is arbitrarily called `name`. We can call our parameters whatever we want - whatever makes semantic sense.

Using **concatenation** I can put the input into a string:

```javascript
const sayName = (name) => {
  console.log('Hello! My name is ' + name)
}
```

**Note**: Love it or hate it, JavaScript arrow functions can be written in a few different ways. One difference is that when there is one argument, the parenthesis are optional.

```javascript
const sayName = name => {
  console.log('Hello! My name is ' + name)
}
```

When we _invoke_ the function, we can specify the value of the parameter, this is called an **argument**:

```javascript
sayName('Frodo')
```

We can continue to invoke the function with whatever **arguments** we want:

```javascript
sayName('Merry')
sayName('Pippin')
sayName('Sam')
```

Each time, the output of the function will change to reflect the argument.

### Bonus

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/a840ad45-aaf3-433b-8e2e-4e209e5ea9d1

Using **string interpolation** we can also add the input to a string, this syntax is sometimes easier for some people to read/write - in this case, it accomplishes the same thing as concatenation

**gotcha** for string interpolation you MUST use backticks (single or double quotes will not work)

```js
const printCustomBanner = text => {
  console.log('========================')
  console.log(`${text}`)
  console.log('========================')
}
```

### Argument vs Parameter

The **argument** is the input, the **parameter** is how the input is represented in the function.

```javascript
const func = PARAMETER => {
  // some code
}

func(ARGUMENT)
```

## Write an arrow function with multiple parameters

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/5a5d94c0-bb61-4f2c-985a-34ee9b4a15da

A function can take any number of parameters.

```javascript
const calculateArea = (num1, num2) => {
  console.log(num1 * num2)
}
```

When you invoke the function, you generally want to supply the right number of arguments.

```javascript
calculateArea(4, 4)
```

> => 16

### Exercises

- Write a function called `minusOne` that takes a parameter `num`. Assuming the argument is a number, print the argument -1.

```javascript
minusOne(10) // 9
minusOne(100) // 99
```

**Extra**

- Write a function `makeSentence` that takes **three** parameters and **concatenates** them into a fully formed sentence.

```javascript
makeSentence('I', 'want', 'chimichangas')
```
> => 'Oh boy, do I want chimichangas or what?'

- Write a function called `getLastElement` that takes a parameter `arr`.
- Invoke the function with an **array** as the argument.
- The function should print the **last element** within the array.

```javascript
getLastElement([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]) // 6
getLastElement(['a', 'b', 'c']) // 'c'
getLastElement([
  [1, 2, 3],
  [4, 5, 6]
]) // [4, 5, 6]
```

_Hint:_ `arr[arr.length - 1]`

- Write a function `divideThreeNums` that takes **three** parameters and prints the third parameter divided by the result of the second parameter divided by the first.

```javascript
divideThreeNums(10, 5, 2) // 4
divideThreeNums(30, 2, 9) // 135
```

## Write an arrow function with a return statement

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/ffc53baa-5f28-45b4-bd48-a91249dca75a

Functions can pass information back to whatever line of code invoked them.

A contrived example:

```javascript
const ten = () => {
  return 10
}

console.log(8 + ten())
```

> => 18

Here `ten()` gets replaced with whatever the value of the `return` statement.

This is the main difference between `return` and `console.log()`. The output value of a function can not come from a console.log.

```javascript
const ten = () => {
  console.log(10)
}
console.log(8 + ten())
```

> => 10
> => NaN

This is because it is trying to add 8 to `undefined`.

A function is only **defined** if it has a return value.

```javascript
const calculateArea = (num1, num2) => {
  return num1 * num2
}
```

The `calculateArea` function has a **return value** of `num1` \* `num2`. It does not just print to the console.

### use the returned value of an invoked function

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/db2e62fa-b7db-4d9e-941a-b48113ac6b19

Sometimes a returned value will not appear in your console. This is normal. **A return is not a console.log**. To see the return value of a function, you will want to console.log the invocation:

```javascript
console.log(calculateArea(2, 10))
```

> => 20

Since `calculateArea` **returns** a value, we can use the return value of `calculateArea` as an argument to an invocation of `calculateArea`.

```javascript
console.log(calculateArea(calculateArea(2, 3), calculateArea(9, 4)))
```

> => 216

### return: stopping a function

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/1ee9d8d0-5589-4e72-b62d-9193a7a6ada3

**RETURN** sends the value of your function immediately. You can use **return** to terminate the function.

Example: will the function return 0 or 1? (It won't return both)

```javascript
const example = input => {
  if (input == 'none') {
    return 0
  }
  return 1 // if input is "none" this line will not run
}
```

```javascript
example('none') // 0
example('two') // 1
```

## Break a problem down into steps

https://media.git.generalassemb.ly/user/1611/files/1436a8c2-a249-46b6-a805-ffe2b39c78b6

Write a function that will **return** true if a word is a Palindrome, or will **return** false if not.

- Problem solve one step at a time
- Each step might require research

Work in layers, one layer at a time. Don't jump ahead until each piece has been tested and works.

Determine if each step will require research, and research it.

- reverse the word (how?)
- check if the word is the same as the reverse (how?)
- return true or false

### Exercises

- Write a function that takes two parameters (strings) and returns `true` (Boolean) if the two strings are identical, `false` if not.

- Write a function that takes three parameters (numbers), sums them, converts the sum into a string and returns the string (eg. `"123"`)
  _ Use your google-fu to research converting a number into a string
  _ Invoke the function a couple of times with different arguments each time

- Experiment
  _ What happens if you supply more arguments than there are parameters?
  _ What happens if you supply fewer arguments than there are parameters?
